so today I thought we'd have a look at
one of the weirdest stars that we know
about and it's got a very tricky name to
say it's called pisil star and I'm not
going to try and say that
again so this star is in the southern
hemisphere it's in the constellation of
Centaurus down there uh relatively near
to the pole it's got a catalog number HD
101065 I'm not sure if that's easier to
say so what do we know about it well it
was discovered in 1873 and cataloged as
a minor 10th magnitude star and the
distance has been measured 365 light
years so nothing very remarkable
there the star itself appears to be a
white star an a class star in the
Stellar classification there and we
estimate that the mass is just one and a
half times that of our sun so nothing
particularly remarkable so
far it does oscillate it's classed as a
variable so it's V 816 Centura in the
variable star catalog and you can see
that these variations are on really
quite tight time scales we're talking uh
15 minutes or something like that so uh
very very rapid
oscillator but in
1961 Anton prisy polish Australian
astronomer shown
here attempted to measure the spectrum
of the star and he just could not get it
to fit any of those uh normal
classifications the original lettering
scheme was
alphabetic
and determined the spectral lines that
you see present in the star you can see
there that the a star has some lines in
the middle of the green that the B stars
and O Stars just do not and the red
mclass stars right down at the bottom
have absolutely loads of lines so that
spectral classification gave rise to the
numbers um but it just doesn't seem to
fit in fact the spectrum of this
particular star is immensely complicated
it's a forest of lines uh there's just
an extract from it there for you to show
how many different Peaks have been found
found and what pilsky was able to
discover was that the Spectrum seemed
very very low in some of the usual
Metals so iron and nickel were at much
lower concentrations in the revealed
composition from the Spectrum as they
should be as you know probably the giant
stars make these elements all the way up
to iron and so it turns out to be very
common in the UN iverse uh by comparison
with many of the other elements and so
it was a real surprise to find that
there wasn't quite so much of the iron
present even stranger was what he did
find to be there in bumper mounts and
these are elements from the periodic
table such as cesium and strontium there
in groups one and two uh down towards
the bottom in the heavier rows so in
fact Beyond
we would normally expect to find things
in great numbers then stops at iron and
nickel which are in the middle of that
yellow section of the transition metals
that's more or less where nuclear fusion
tends to stop all the other elements are
made in the explosions of stars either
giant stars or neutron stars that
Collide um create a forest of neutrons
and those neutrons bombard the elements
make heavier and heavier ones so it's
rather unusual to find quite so much of
these uh mediumweight
Metals what was even weirder was the
presence of the rare earth metals in
large numbers so prmium neodymium
holmium and
erbium and uh if you want to find out
where those are on the table you have to
look uh in the middle there to uh pin
them down
so what we've uh also discovered though
was thorium and uranium right up at the
top of the ordinary periodic table now
there is a caveat with this it seems
that the star's magnetic field might be
involved in complicating the Spectrum
seems to be highly magnetized and maybe
that is fooling us and that these
elements are not there but if we
discount that for the moment and it's
assume that they uh measurements are
correct then uh let's look a bit further
what we found was also some real
surprises the actinium and
protactinium elements in the actinide
series and those are up there alongside
uranium in that bottom row AC and
Pa these are really heavy metals and
they are radioactive so they should
Decay um r active elements such as the
radioactive uranium and so forth Decay
into them uranium at the top there turns
into thorium by spitting out an alpha
particle uh then an electron is emitted
and you get
protactinium another one and you go back
to a lighter element lighter isotope of
the element Uranium and then it decays
back to Thorium in a lyser isotope then
down to radium and then a forest of
stuff starts to be able to happen
ultimately ending up at l
uh there PB lead 206 getting
created but the story continues we found
elements heavier than
uranium unknown in uh other than as a
result of our scientific research here
on Earth not naturally
occurring neptunium and plutonium the
next two Beyond uranium elements 93 and
but it goes on amorium curium Berkelium
and californium up there to through to
ele 98 and even to Element 99
Einsteinium now I'm not going to go into
the details of all of them but just a
mention of einum element number 99 first
discovered in the residue of the ivy
Mike hydrogen bomb test uh that Forest
of neutrons that was created was able to
bombard the um metals and take uh a
course from uranium all the way up to
californium and Decay back to
Einsteinium they discovered um now
Einsteinium only got uh a number of
isotopes that are very
radioactive the most common one the
253 atomic weight version decays in just
20 days and the 252 is the longer lived
one and that's just over a year 472 so
in a few years your Einsteinium should
be gone so what is going on how are we
managing to detect
it well even if the magnetic field is
confusing us and maybe that's not right
there are definite detections of two
elements that we have been able to find
and again these do not occur naturally
on Earth technitium was so named because
technology was required to create it
promethium even more
so there are some elements of tech
isotopes of technetium that have uh
milliony year
long half lives but none are really
stable and promethium well that uh can
last only 18 years even in its most
stable form so to find these two for
sure in the spectrum is very peculiar
something must be actively cre in them
or they would just
disappear what could that be well one
suggestion was that maybe there is a
neutron star companion and it's emitting
Jets of high energy radiation um
including a lot of neutrons being thrown
off and maybe that was irradiating the
outer layers of the star and forcing the
rapid uh process to generate these heavy
elements well that's possible but we
should also see the heavy isotope of
hydrogen being generated duum if that
was the case and we just don't so what's
going on maybe that's not true while
we're on the subject though of
companions there was a possible
detection of a companion star a 14th
magnitude using infrared star just a
little way away eight Arc seconds of
th000 au and guia suggests that perhaps
this might now be actually just a line
of sight effect at a different distance
so there are no known Companions of
pilsky
star so if we go back to the sort of
nuclear explanation if we look at uh the
atomic nuclei what we find is that all
those protons that are inside are all
positively charged trying to repel each
other and the nuclei are held together
by the strong nuclear force now the
strong nuclear force acts on the quarks
inside the protons but it also acts on
the quarks inside neutrons which don't
repel each other by electromagnetism
being electrically neutral so to try and
keep the posit of the protons from
repelling each other we have to add
neutrons and if you add enough neutrons
you can generally increase the stability
of the heavier nuclei um you can get
away with a relatively small number of
neutrons to begin with but as you go
further up the number of neutrons uh
needs to be boosted you can see on there
there's the straight line on the diagram
that's the 50/50 line so we've drawn a
line from 82 protons that's lead up to
82 and that's uh too low we don't find
elements in that position they're only
present really this on the uh uh blue
and brown lines with the stable ones
being on
the black dotted line that goes up
that's the point of balance between
protons and neutrons that seems to give
us the most
stability now that line runs out at 82
it doesn't go any further up to the uh
top right of the diagram there that
Wiggly black line ceases that's because
elements Beyond 82 protons just don't
seem to be long-term stable they might
be fairly stable and we do detect them
so things like uranium have 92 uh but uh
the uh fundamentally they're all
radioactive up at that
point some of the Isotopes that we're
detecting though such as samarium and
promethium and so forth we recognize
those as fishing products from neutrons
bombarding
isotopes of uranium and causing the
nucleus to split so not normal
radioactive decay splitting out either
electrons or anti- electrons or alpha
particles but breaking the nucleus in
half and releasing two daughter nuclei
and there is a possibility that there
are heavier elements up there that are
splitting up to create
these when I say heavier we're talking
about the island of stability which lies
off the end of that previous diagram you
can see again here the pinch point at Z
equals 82 lead where there are 82
protons where there are almost no stable
isotopes at all in fact um and the great
sort of sea of blue impinges but you can
wiggle through just through lead there
and get further up the periodic table
and that's important because the rapid
Neutron capture and other processes that
build these heavy elements need a
pathway to make their way one at a time
up the up the chain so they all go
through that little pinch point but
manage to get there and make some of
these heavier
elements um
now calculations that were done in the
1960s suggest that there might be an a
cut off Island where the number of
neutrons and protons balances out again
but you just can't get there by the r
process adding one at a time because the
uh the channel between them is
completely flooded with that sea of inst
unstable blue the instability sea of
unstable combinations cuts it off so it
might be stable but you just can't get
there by climbing the normal radioactive
addition ladders of the r and s
processes that go on in stars and in
supern noi and explos
collided neutron stars so why do we
think that there might be stable
elements up there well when we look at
what uh elements what nuclei are
actually stable they seem to correspond
to a number of magic numbers uh these
correspond we think to filled shells
where the uh nuclei behave rather like
the electrons in an atom and filling up
shells that gives us that layout of the
periodic t in the first
place and those numbers that you can
calculate with a little bit of quantum
mechanics give you 2 8 20 28 50 82 again
and
126 and so two is helium 8 is oxygen 20
is calcium and then we've got other
elements like nickel tin at Element 50
and Lead 82 and we've never made element
126 so the idea that 126 is a stable
able number is a bit of a guess but it
should be if quantum mechanics is right
and it seems pretty good in most other
respects and we do know that if you have
126 neutrons that adds stability to your
isotope as well so there's good evidence
that this might be the case and so if we
had some very very heavy elements and
they were splitting up they could well
be releasing and creating um
some of the nucleoids that we see as a
result of their super heavy nuclei
splitting in
half
now nature is amazing and often beats us
to it so although we have only managed
to make elements all the way up to 118
organ asson I believe um nature seems to
have beaten us to it this is Supernova
2006gy B a mystery supern noi explode
and they release vast amounts of energy
and we can see how that energy then
decays as they fade away over a period
of a couple of hundred days usually and
what we found was that we could divide
them into two main classes the typical
core collapse of a giant star a type two
Supernova where a giant star has made
all the elements up to iron and built a
large iron core which then
collapses that creates the pale yellow
curve the type two starting at a
brightness a nominal brightness of one
and stays there for about a 100 days
before then sloping away down and fading
out when you have two white dwarf stars
collide you get a type 1A Supernova and
they are about 10 times brighter you can
see they start near the 10 on the
brightness scale and create this rather
more Peak and rapidly decaying light
curve um again lasting about 200 days
before we lose them but with a
characteristic hump on the side and
that's due to the decay of aluminium 26
in fact so we we understand these very
well and I've got a couple of other
Supernova plotted on here one of them
was the Supernova that we saw in the
large melenic Cloud
1987a which has got a very weak and
rather peculiar light curve
and the other one
was
2006gy its designation and the cyan
colored blobs with little squares at the
top there those are showing its light
curve and it was enormous it went to
more than 100 on the light curve
scale it's somewhat similar in shape to
1987a but vastly vastly more powerful
and we don't really understand what
drove this there's some possibilities
that it might be a quark NOA if you want
to understand that a bit more that I've
got a video called Quark stars and
strange matter which has been extremely
popular um perhaps you'd like to look at
that um you can find it yourself I'm not
going to give you a link
and in it I mention how these things
might come to be but the weird really
weird thing about this was the when you
looked at the X-ray Spectrum it shows
elements all the way up to 130 on the
atomic number scale and we can pretty
much read those off very easily there's
a law called Mosley's law that tells us
that uh the wavelength of the strongest
x-ray the highest energy x-rays that you
get um from an element is proportional
um via the square root I think to the
number of uh protons that there are in
the nucleus it's all to do with the
inner mod energy level of the tightly
bound electrons so a pretty reliable
method and it produces a good result
here showing elements not just 130 but
several of them stepping up to a maximum
of 130 so maybe this Supernova has shown
us that you can make these super heavy
elements and maybe they are present
somehow in the outer layers of presan
star and that they are decaying either
by a radioactive decay process or by
nuclear fishion in some way and
producing a steady supply of elements
like promethium and technetium in the
atmosphere of the
star of course there is another theory
and that is that it's aliens dumping
their nuclear waste into the
star well it might be I would suggest
that it's very very expensive process
because it costs a lot of fuel to throw
something down into the sun you
basically have to slow it down by 18
kmers per second because that's the
speed that the Earth is orbiting
otherwise it will just car carry on
orbiting around the star making it
actually Collide you need to kill that
energy of rotation kill get rid of the
angular momentum or it just won't fall
in and that's going to use a lot of fuel
but some people have suggested we could
dump our nuclear waste into the Sun and
get rid of it that way um I'd also say
that actually nuclear waste might turn
out to be very valuable especially if
it's got elements like Einsteinium in it
for in large numbers or even somehow
they've managed to make super heavy
elements who knows uh so fascinating
stuff and there is another theory
related to aliens about this which I'll
just end on and that is that they're
trying to advertise their presence by
doing this rather than
I don't know beaming a radio signal or
beaming out a laser beam targeted at
some particular distant planet that they
think might have intelligent life on it
you know shining a laser beam across the
Galaxy at us why would they pick us why
do we don't look that interesting
especially from 300 light years away
when uh you know we hadn't even invented
radio at that stage so what would be the
point um but perhaps a way of
advertising your presence is to
synthesize these heavy elements and
throw them into your star because they
will be spotted by astronomers from
right across the Galaxy so maybe this is
a just a aliens setting out the welcome
mat who knows anyway thanks very much
for listening and I'll end that one
there